PEP 772: A round of updates (#4320)
python/peps: peps/pep-0772.rst

Delegations
-----------

The Python Steering Council will delegate decision making to the Packaging
Council for PEPs related to the Python packaging. The bodies would work
together on issues that intersect the packaging domain and language stewardship

> (including the CPython implementation, standard library, and distribution).

Reviewer: We've seen two such PEPs recently (776 & 780). Would it make sense to recommend something like a joint PEP delegate? Clearly not to be mandated, but it may help alleviate coordination delays between the packaging and steering councils.

Reviewer 2: Interesting examples @AA-Turner!

> Would it make sense to recommend something like a joint PEP delegate?

Could you elaborate?  Who would do the delegation (presumably, the SC) and who would be the delegate (not the SC and PC together, right?  Seems weird that the SC would delegate to itself).

Reviewer: The idea is to reduce co-ordination friction between the two bodies. Taking two extremes:

* Each body considers only aspects within its own remit. Pros: no requirement for coordination, perhaps faster decisions. Cons: the decisions could differ (one rejects & one acceps), no consideration of overlap, decisions could be on different timelines, discussion could fracture.
* Both bodies consider the PEP together. Pros: consistency of position, one decision. Cons: likely to take longer to corral ten people, takes up time for both committees, slower pace of innovation.

My proposal instead is for the PEP to recommend that both bodies agree an individual/set of individuals to serve as the PEP delegate for each 'joint PEP', perhaps a nominated member from each committee, perhaps a domain expert, etc. This aligns with the mandate in PEP 13 "*Instead of ruling on individual PEPs, it’s better to define a standard process for PEP decision making*", and I would argue is more productive than the alternatives above.

Regardless of if you take my idea, though, I think it would be useful to add more detail on how 'joint PEPs' are decided. Currently it says "will work together", but this is vague. For example, what happens in the accept/reject scenario above, does one body have 'more' authority than the other, etc. There is no bright line between the language & its packaging, so there will inevitably be overlap!

A

Reviewer: Thanks for the rationale @warsaw. I think an explicit statement to that effect would be useful in the PEP, though. 

For context, my understanding was that the Packaging Council was to be its own thing, and in a sense another 'top level' body alongside the Steering Council. I recall a statement to this effect when I asked on the first draft why the process was so 'heavy' here, as opposed to the other recent 'SC subcommittees' (Typing, Editorial).

I'd find it useful to clarify that even though the PEP specifies that packaging council members are elected from a distinct electorate than the core developers, and the SC doesn't have any say, it is still the intent that the governance authority flows down from the SC, rather than 'up' from the packaging council electorate.

If anything, this would help clarify things, and perhaps help dispell the notion that packaging is entirely distinct from the SC/core developers.

This might be better suited for Discourse, but it's quicker to leave a quick response here!

A

Reviewer 2: Thanks @AA-Turner.  While the `Delegations` section does say that the SC will delegate packaging decisions to the PC, what I'm reading in your comment is that the authority relationship between the SC and PC needs to be clarified.  I'll take an action item to clarify this in a follow up PR.

> The PSF Board is encouraged to formally deprecate the Packaging Workgroup and

Reviewer: "close" or "end" instead of "deprecate"?

Reviewer 3: Or "deactivate"? Following the language of https://www.python.org/psf/workgroups/

Reviewer 2: Agreed that "deprecate" doesn't have the finality and closure I think we expect.  @hugovk I'd be fine with "deactivate" although I can't find that word used at the workgroups link.

A council election consists of two phases:

* Phase 1: A voting member (defined later in this document) can self-nominate

>   themselves for the council elections. Such a nomination must include

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  themselves, or nominate any other candidate, for the council elections. Such a nomination must include
```

Reviewer 2: I agree and like the first suggestion, which I'll add in a follow up PR.  For SC elections, PEP 13 doesn't require a formal recorded acceptance, but the returns officer can validate such third party nominations if needed.

>   information about the member's relevant affiliations.

Reviewer 2: We don't say anything about non-self-nominations, but maybe we should allow voting members to also nominate other people, whether those nominees are themselves voting members or not (similar to how the SC and core dev nominations work).

Reviewer 2: I'll add this to a follow up PR

---------------------

No more than two Packaging Council members should be employed by or

> significantly affiliated with the same entity. An entity would be a company, a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
significantly affiliated with the same entity. An entity is a company, a
```

company and its subsidiaries, or another incorporated entity such as a
non-profit or educational institution with its own mission and goals. PSF

> members are explicitly exempt from this restriction, but _not_ PSF directors,

Reviewer: Invalid syntax (I assume you meant emphasis/italics?)
```suggestion
members are explicitly exempt from this restriction, but *not* PSF directors
```

or officers.

While we trust council members to act in the best interests of Python rather
than themselves or their employers, the mere appearance of any one company
dominating Python development could itself be harmful and erode trust.

> PSF staff members are not permitted to be on the Packaging Council.

Reviewer: Is there a 'cooling-off' period for which this prohibition still applies, e.g. 6-12 months after ending employment?

Wording suggestion:
```suggestion
PSF staff members are not permitted to be members of the Packaging Council.
```

Reviewer 2: > Is there a 'cooling-off' period for which this prohibition still applies, e.g. 6-12 months after ending employment?

We hadn't considered this, but I think it's not necessary.  If someone wants to run for the Packaging Council bad enough to resign from PSF employment, then that shows a pretty significant commitment, especially since they'd still have to run for the council and be elected.

Are you worried about someone who runs for the council, gets elected, and *then* resigns from the PSF?  That seems like a pretty unlikely scenario, and even so, I'm not sure what the problem would be with that.

council members must resign to remedy the issue, and the resulting vacancies
can then be filled as normal.

--------------
Voting members
--------------

Responsibility
==============

Voting members participate in formal votes to elect the Packaging Council.

Processes
=========

Initial membership
------------------

Initial set of voting members will include anyone who has taken the time to
formalise their participation in the packaging community. This includes:

* PyPA members: Anyone with the triage bit or commit bit, or at least one
  project in the PyPA organisation.
* Packaging workgroup members: Anyone who is listed on the Packaging WG charter
  who is willing to participate is welcome.
* Interested core team members: Any Python core team member who is willing to
  participate is welcome.
* Wider community members: An initial set of for-profit companies, nonprofit
  organizations, academic or educational institutions and smaller unaffiliated
  projects would be invited to nominate three individuals to represent them.

>   [TODO: add a link here for the initial set, that the authors curate]

Author: This is intentionally left as a TODO.

Reviewer: For history/archival reasons, can we have the eventual full list in the PEP itself, rather than an external resource?

Reviewer 2: I'm keeping notes and will add this section to a follow up PR.  For now, I'm going to resolve this thread and get this PR merged.

>   [TODO: add a link here for the initial set, that the authors curate]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  See [link to Appendix] for the initial set of community voting members.
```
